---
title: "Keeping Distances"
date: "2019-07-01"
featured_image: "../../images/featured_images/keeping_distances.jpg"
caption: "distance caption"
featured_image_caption: "distance image caption"
---

When was the last time you went more than a day without thinking about distance?
It might seem like a strange question. But notions of distance, whether literal
or metaphorical, appear frequently in my own life.

Here are some distance-related thoughts that creep into my mind on an almost daily basis:

  - Where should I go for lunch today? What's *nearby* and delicious?

  - What are my goals for today? How *close* am I to meeting them?

  - Is the world still on fire today? What can I do to help bring society *closer* to
  the more empathetic, thoughtful, and sustainable ideal in my head?

With distance comes a notion of proximity: when things are close, and when
things are far away. Sometimes this proximity is objective and easy to measure.
Other times, it is more abstract. Regardless of the way the terms are used,
though, nearly everyone has an intuition for what distance means.

Mathematician [Morris Kline](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morris_Kline) once
wrote that "Mathematicians create by acts of insights and intuition." So it is
for the intuitive notion of distance. In what follows, I'd like to explore
different examples of distances in mathematics. We'll start with the most
well-known formulation, and from there will move on to more exotic examples.
We'll see what ties all of these distances together, and what makes each one of
them unique.

Let's get close to some distances!

---

### Taxicab Calculations

In geometry class, every student learns that the shortest distance between two
points is a straight line. And if you know the coordinates of those points, with
the help of the Pythagorean theorem you can even calculate this minimal
distance. If you connect the points with a horizontal and a vertical line
segment, these segments will form two sides of a right triangle. The hypotenuse
of this triangle represents that shortest distance.

DEMONSTRATION
  Drag points, see side lengths and hypotenuse change

When looking at a map, this shortest distance is often described by saying it's
the distance "as the crow flies." Unfortunately, dear reader, if you're anything
like me, you are not a crow. For everyone tethered to the ground, this shortest
distance is typically unattainable. More often, you're constrained by the roads
in the town or city you live in.

Enter the **manhattan distance**, also known as the **taxicab geometry.** This
is a way of measuring distance that assumes you're constrained to grid. Such a
notion may seem strange in a math classroom, but in the real world we measure
distances in this way all the time (just ask Google Maps). We often talk about
distances between city locations in terms of blocks: how many over, and how many
up or down. This is just the manhattan distance.

In this taxicab geometry, there are no diagonals. From every point on the grid,
you can move in one of four directions: up, down, left, or right. Such a
restriction still leads to a perfectly good notion of distance. However, it
comes with some slightly surprising properties.

For one, unlike the notion of distance you learn about in high school geometry,
when it comes to connecting two points in the taxicab geometry, there is *no
unique shortest path* in general. For example, if you're trying to connect two
opposite corners of a square, you have two paths to choose from: clockwise or
counter-clockwise.

Here's a demonstration that let's you explore how many different paths will
connect two points when using the manhattan distance.

DEMONSTRATION
  Drag points, slider to highlight different numbers of paths

For another fun bit of trivia, let's explore what circles look like in this
geometry. You can define a circle to simply be the set of points that are a
fixed distance from some central point. As you may recall, this fixed distance
is called the **radius** of the circle.

With the manhattan distance on a grid, circles always consist of a finite number
of points. For instance, a circle of radius 1 centered at any point will consist
of the four points on either side of the center.

Here's how a circle looks in the taxicab geometry as you increase the radius:

DEMONSTRATION
  Drag slider, increase radius

As you can see, circles in this geometry are just rotated squares! Moreover, the
circumference of any circle in this geometry is just the radius multiplied by 8.
As a consequence, the ratio of a circle's circumference to twice its radius,
which in traditional geometry has the value &pi; &approx; 3.14159..., has a distinctly less
mysterious flavor here. As far as the manhattan distance is concerned, &pi; is
simply equal to 4.

---

### Hamming it Up

Whenever I write a story, I make typos. Fortunately, my computer can help alert
me to these mistakes, and if I'm paying attention, they're easy to correct.

But how does the computer know when I've made a mistake? As it turns out, the
idea boils down to distance.

Intuitively, this makes sense. If I type matehmatics when I mean to type
mathematics, we can agree that the misspelled word is *close* to the correctly
spelled word. But in order to make this intuition rigorous, we need a more
precise understanding of what "close" means in this context.

Let's take a look at three notions of distance when we're talking about words
instead of points.

##### Hamming Distance

The [Hamming distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamming_distance) is a
measurement you can use on words of the same length. It counts up the number of
positions at which the corresponding letters in the word are different.

For example, "ghost" and "roast" have a hamming distance of 3, because the first
three characters in the two words are different, while the last two are the
same.

Note the order of letters here is important! the "o" in "ghost" doesn't
count as a match with the "o" in "roast", because "o" is the third letter in
ghost but the second letter in roast.

Since the words you're comparing must have the same length, the Hamming distance
isn't practical as a spell-checking tool. More common applications for this
distance include error detecting / correcting. See the references at the end for
more details. 

##### Levenshtein Distance

If we want to compare words of different lengths, we need a different way to
measure distance. The [Levenshtein distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_distance)
accomplishes this goal by generalizing, in some sense, the Hamming distance.

The Levenshtein distance calculates the distance between words as being the
number of single-character edits needed to transform one word to the other. An
edit is defined as the addition of a letter, the removal of a letter, or the
exchange of a letter at a given position for a different letter.

For example, the Levenshtein distance between "friend" and "foe" is 4: change
the "r" to an "o" and then delete the "i", "n", and "d." 

When the two strings are of equal length, the Hamming distance is an upper bound
for the Levenshtein distance, but sometimes the Levenshtein will be shorter. For
example, "tree" and "reed" have a Hamming distance of 4, but a Levenshtein
distance of only 2, since you can delete the "t" from the start of "tree" and
then add a "d" to the end.

##### Damerau-Levenshtein Distance

Let's return to my original typo: matehmatics instead of mathematics. In this
case, the Hamming distance is well-defined, and like the Levenshtein distance it
equals 2.

In a 1964 paper titled "A technique for computer detection and correction of
spelling errors," Fred Damerau added a slight modification to the Levenshtein
distance. In what's now known as the [Damerau-Levenshtein distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damerau%E2%80%93Levenshtein_distance), swapping of
two adjacent characters counts as a single edit, rather than two. According to
this distance, matehmatics is only one edit away from mathematics.

Damerau motivated this change by observing that more than 80% of typos were
caused by one of the four edit types that the Damerau-Levenshtein distance
tracks: a missing letter, an extra letter, an incorrect letter, or two adjacent
letters out of order.

Here's a demonstration for you to play around with these three notions of word
distance. What would a circle look like in this geometry?

DEMONSTRATION
  Type a word in two inputs, see the various distance values

---

### Fourier Farness



---

### What's in a Distance?

- note that some extensions of Levenshtein fail to be true distances in the mathematical sense. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damerau%E2%80%93Levenshtein_distance


---

### p-adics (rename)

---

### Conclusion

Sources:

- [What algorithm gives suggestions in a spell checker?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2294915/what-algorithm-gives-suggestions-in-a-spell-checker)

- [Hamming Distance and Error Correcting Codes](http://www.oxfordmathcenter.com/drupal7/node/525)

- [A technique for computer detection and correction of spelling errors](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=363958.363994)
